## Title: Host response during unresolved urinary tract infection alters female mammary tissue homeostasis through collagen deposition and TIMP1 

**Abstract**: Exposure to pathogens throughout a lifetime influences immunity and organ function. Here, we explore how the systemic host-response to bacterial urinary tract infection (UTI) induces tissue-specific alterations to the mammary gland. Utilizing a combination of histological tissue analysis, single cell RNA sequencing and flow cytometry, we identify that mammary tissue from UTI-bearing mice displays collagen deposition, enlarged ductal structures, ductal hyperplasia with atypical epithelial transcriptomes and altered immune composition. Bacterial cells are absent in the mammary tissue and blood of UTI-bearing mice, therefore, alterations to the distal mammary tissue are mediated by the systemic host response to local infection. Furthermore, broad spectrum antibiotic treatment resolves the infection and restores mammary cellular and tissue homeostasis. Systemically, unresolved UTI correlates with increased plasma levels of the metalloproteinase inhibitor, TIMP1, which controls extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and neutrophil function. Treatment of nulliparous and post-lactation UTI-bearing female mice with a TIMP1 neutralizing antibody, or broad-spectrum antibiotic, prevents mammary collagen deposition, thus providing evidence for an unexpected link between the systemic host response during UTI and mammary alterations. 

**Link to Manuscript**: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.02.05.578977v1

This page includes code for analysis present in Host response during unresolved urinary tract infection alters female mammary tissue homeostasis through collagen deposition and TIMP1. 
